# Sort ALgorithms Analysis

This is a brief documentation of of the Visual Studio project and the accompanying Python script that uses Matplotlib library to create plot charts of the sorting runtime.

## Visual Studio Project
The Visual Studio Project consists of different folders, the most important is *Algos* containing 3 main files:
- Algos.h
- Algos.cpp
- Main.cpp

With all member functions declaration in *Algos.h* and definition in *Algos.cpp*.
*Main.cpp* is where Algos class function are used to obtain data sets from the two files:
- input_large.txt
- input_small.txt

sorting runtimes get saved in:
- sortResults.txt
- sortResults_milliseconds.txt

Template classes are used to enable dealing with data sets of different data types.

### Algos.cpp

#### generateArray()
- Generates and returns an vector of random elements depending on the size  and maximum element value given as parameters.
- Time Complexity: O(N)

#### recordArray()
- Takes a vector generated by ```generateVector()``` and writes it to one of two ```.txt``` files, depending on the vector size. The two files are ```input_small.txt``` and ```input_large.txt```.
- Time Complexity: O(N)

#### recordTime()
- Takes a string with the sort name and a vector of pair with the data set sizes and the time taken by the sorting algorithm for each one, then saves the time to ```sortResults.txt``` file.
- Time complexity: O(N)

#### fetchArray()
- Takes an int as a parameter determining of the size of the array to fetch from the  data files and setting the private member ```myArr``` equal to that array.
- Time Complexity: O(N), where N is the file size.

#### MergeSort()
- Takes an array as a parameter and sorts the array using *Divide and Conquer* method. The array is split into two halves recursively and then each two halves get merged using ```Merge()```.
- Time Complexity: O(NLog(N))

#### Merge()
- Helper function for ```MergeSort()```.
- Takes 3 integer parameters determining the two halves to be merged.
- The function uses an auxillarry array to put each element of the two halves into place.
- Time Complexity: O(N)

#### QuickSort()
- Takes an array as a parameter and sorts the array using Divide and Conquer method.
-  The array is split into two halves using ```partition``` where each half should contain all elements smaller than a choosen pivot and other half containing all elements bigger than the pivot.
-  Time Complexity: O(NLog(N)) (On Average).

#### partition()
- Takes two integer parameters determining the begin and end of the sub-array to be partitioned.
- The pivot element is choosen as the last element in the sub-array
- Returns the index at which the array is partitioned.
- Time Complexity:O(N).


## AlgosTimePlots.py
```AlgosTimePlots.py``` uses *Matplotlib* library to create plots for each sorting algorithm runtime against several data sets.

- The Python script uses ```sortsResults_milliseconds.txt``` previously populated file to create a plot of each sorting algorithm performance against time.
- Charts are saved in the same ```Algos Analysis``` directory.
